.\" WiFi Audio Streaming — manual page
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Marco Morosi. Licensed under EUPL-1.2.
.\"
.TH WFAS 1 "2026" "1.0.0" "WiFi Audio Streaming"
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH NAME
.\"
wfas \- stream audio over a local Wi\-Fi network
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\"
.B wfas
.RB [ --gui | --cli ]
.RB [ --mode
.IR server | client | discover ]
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br
.B wfas
.B control
.IR volume " <0\-100> | mute | unmute | stop | status"
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\"
.B wfas
transmits audio from one device (server) to one or more receivers (clients)
on the same local network using the WFAS protocol.
It also supports RTP and HTTP streaming as optional additional protocols.
.PP
Run without arguments,
.B wfas
prints its help and exits.
Use
.B --cli
(or
.BR --server )
to start in CLI mode without loading any graphical interface,
making it suitable for use on headless systems such as Raspberry Pi or in
automation scripts.
.PP
When a display is available,
.B --gui
opens the full graphical interface.
Combining
.B --gui
with
.B --mode
opens the GUI and immediately starts the corresponding operation,
as if the user had clicked the Start button.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH MODES
.\"
.TP
.B server
Capture audio from the system's default audio output (or a virtual cable)
and stream it to connected clients.
This is the default mode when no
.B --mode
flag is provided.
.TP
.B client
Receive audio from a server and play it on a local output device.
If
.B --server
is omitted,
.B wfas
scans the network for available servers and connects automatically
when only one is found, or presents an interactive list otherwise.
.TP
.B discover
Scan the network and print available servers.
With
.B --watch
the scan continues until the process is interrupted.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH OPTIONS
.\"
.SS Entry point
.TP
.B --gui
Open the graphical interface.
.TP
.B --cli
Start in CLI mode (explicit).
.\"
.SS Mode selection
.TP
\fB--mode\fR \fIserver\fR|\fIclient\fR|\fIdiscover\fR
Select the operating mode.
.\"
.SS Server options
.TP
\fB--port\fR \fIn\fR
WFAS streaming port (default:
.IR 9090 ).
.TP
\fB--mic-port\fR \fIn\fR
Port used to receive microphone audio from clients (default:
.IR 9092 ).
.TP
.B --multicast
Enable multicast transmission.
Automatically set when
.B --rtp
or
.B --http
is used.
.TP
.B --rtp
Enable RTP side-channel.
Allows any RTP-capable player (e.g. VLC) to receive the audio stream.
Implies
.BR --multicast .
.TP
\fB--rtp-port\fR \fIn\fR
RTP destination port (default:
.IR 9094 ).
.TP
.B --http
Enable HTTP streaming (AAC chunked + Opus WebSocket).
Implies
.BR --multicast .
.TP
\fB--http-port\fR \fIn\fR
HTTP server port (default:
.IR 8080 ).
.TP
.B --http-safari
Enable Safari-compatible HLS mode on the HTTP server.
.TP
.B --sdp
Print the SDP session descriptor to standard output when the server starts.
Only meaningful with
.BR --rtp .
.TP
\fB--sdp-out\fR \fIpath\fR
Write the SDP session descriptor to
.I path
in addition to printing it.
.\"
.SS Client options
.TP
\fB--connect\fR \fIip\fR
IP address of the server to connect to.
Implies client mode when no explicit mode is given.
If omitted,
.B wfas
performs automatic discovery.
.TP
\fB--output\fR \fIname\fR
Name (or substring) of the audio output device to use.
Uses the system default when omitted.
To list available devices run
.B wfas --mode discover --json
and look at
.IR serverAudioSettings .
.\"
.SS Microphone options (client-to-server return channel)
These options send the client's microphone back to the server (talkback),
independently of the main server-to-client audio stream.
.TP
.B --mic
Enable microphone return.
.TP
\fB--mic-input\fR \fIname\fR
Name (or substring) of the microphone device.
Uses the system default when omitted.
.TP
\fB--mic-routing\fR \fImode\fR
How the microphone is routed on the server side.
.RS
.TP
.B mix
Mix microphone into the outgoing audio stream (default when
.B --mic
is used).
.TP
.B virtual
Route microphone to a virtual output device (e.g. CABLE Input).
.TP
.B off
Disable microphone routing.
.RE
.\"
.SS Audio options
.TP
\fB--volume\fR \fIn\fR
Initial volume as a percentage from 0 to 100 (default:
.IR 100 ).
.TP
.B --mute
Start with audio muted.
.\"
.SS Runtime control
These subcommands communicate with a running
.B wfas
instance via an IPC socket and exit immediately.
.TP
\fBcontrol volume\fR \fIn\fR
Set the volume to
.I n
percent (0\-100).
.TP
.B control mute
Mute the audio.
.TP
.B control unmute
Unmute the audio.
.TP
.B control stop
Stop the current stream without closing the process.
.TP
.B control status
Print the current status as JSON, including mode, volume, mute state,
port, protocols enabled, uptime, and PID.
.\"
.SS Discover options
.TP
.B --watch
Keep scanning continuously instead of exiting after 5 seconds.
.TP
.B --json
Output results as newline-delimited JSON objects instead of a human-readable table.
.\"
.SS Global options
.TP
\fB--interface\fR \fIname\fR
Name of the network interface to use (default:
.IR Auto ,
which picks the active non-virtual interface automatically).
.TP
\fB--config\fR \fIpath\fR
Load settings from
.I path
instead of the default settings store.
Useful when running multiple instances with different configurations.
.TP
.B --json
Emit all output as newline-delimited JSON.
Useful for scripting and monitoring pipelines.
.TP
.B --quiet
Suppress informational output.
Only errors are written to standard error.
.TP
.BR --legacy-engine ", " --no-native-engine
(Server only.)
Use the legacy FFmpeg audio grabber instead of the native C audio engine.
.PP
The native engine is the default on all three platforms:
.RS
.TP
.B Windows
WASAPI exclusive loopback \[em] no virtual driver required.
.TP
.B macOS
ScreenCaptureKit \[em] system audio capture.
.TP
.B Linux
PulseAudio/PipeWire via
.BR dlopen (3),
automatically mutes the default speaker sink
while streaming and restores it on exit.
.RE
.PP
Use
.B --legacy-engine
on Linux when PulseAudio or PipeWire is not available
(e.g.\& ALSA-only minimal systems), or as a fallback if the native
engine fails to initialise.
.B --no-native-engine
is a legacy alias for the same flag.
.TP
.B --protocol
Print an explanation of the WFAS v2 wire protocol (packet format, control
messages, version negotiation) and exit.
.TP
.B --licenses
Print the third-party open-source licenses (including the FFmpeg/LGPL notice)
and exit. See also the
.B LICENSING
section below.
.TP
.B --help
Print usage information and exit.
.TP
.B --version
Print the version string and exit.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH IPC CONTROL
.\"
When
.B wfas
starts it creates a file
.IR /tmp/wfas-<pid>.port
containing the TCP port number of its local IPC socket.
The
.B control
subcommand reads this file, connects to the socket, and sends a JSON command.
.PP
If multiple
.B wfas
instances are running simultaneously, the control command targets the most
recently started instance.
A future
.B --pid
option will allow targeting a specific instance by PID.
.PP
The IPC socket listens only on the loopback interface and is not accessible
from other machines.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH FILES
.\"
.TP
.I ~/.config/wfas/settings.json
User settings (Linux, macOS).
.TP
.I %APPDATA%\ewfas\esettings.json
User settings (Windows).
.TP
.I /tmp/wfas-<pid>.port
IPC port file created by each running instance.
Deleted automatically on exit.
.TP
.I /tmp/stream.sdp
RTP session descriptor written when
.B --rtp
is active.
Used by external players.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH EXIT STATUS
.\"
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error (bad arguments, port conflict, device not found, etc.).
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH EXAMPLES
.\"
Start a CLI server on the default port:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --cli
.RE
.PP
Print the WFAS v2 protocol reference:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --protocol
.RE
.PP
Start a server with RTP enabled and print the SDP to stdout:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --mode server --rtp --sdp
.RE
.PP
Pipe the SDP directly into VLC:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --mode server --rtp --sdp | vlc -
.RE
.PP
Write the SDP to a file for later use:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --mode server --rtp --sdp-out /tmp/stream.sdp
.RE
.PP
Connect as a client to a specific server:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --connect 192.168.1.42
.RE
.PP
Connect and specify the output device:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --connect 192.168.1.42 --output "Built-in Audio"
.RE
.PP
Discover servers and output JSON (useful for scripts):
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --mode discover --json
.RE
.PP
Keep the discovery running and monitor in real time:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --mode discover --watch
.RE
.PP
Open the GUI and start the server immediately:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --gui --mode server --multicast
.RE
.PP
Open the GUI and connect to a specific server immediately:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas --gui --mode client --connect 192.168.1.42
.RE
.PP
Set volume to 60% on a running instance:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas control volume 60
.RE
.PP
Check the status of the running instance:
.PP
.RS
.B wfas control status
.RE
.PP
Run as a systemd service on Raspberry Pi (example unit file):
.PP
.RS
.nf
[Unit]
Description=WiFi Audio Streaming Server
After=network.target sound.target

[Service]
ExecStart=/opt/wfas/bin/wfas --mode server --multicast
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=5
User=pi

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
.fi
.RE
.PP
Monitor volume from a shell script:
.PP
.RS
.nf
while true; do
    wfas control status --json | jq -r .volume
    sleep 5
done
.fi
.RE
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH NOTES
.\"
On Linux the native C audio engine uses
.BR dlopen (3)
to load
.B libpulse-simple.so.0
at runtime.
No link-time dependency is required; the
.B libaudio_engine.so
bundled in the package works on any distribution.
If
.B libpulse-simple
is not installed, start the server with
.B --legacy-engine
to use the FFmpeg backend instead, and install
.B pulseaudio-utils
(Debian/RPi OS) or
.B pipewire-pulseaudio
(Fedora/Arch) to enable the native engine.
.PP
On Windows, some firewalls block multicast packets.
If clients cannot discover the server, try disabling multicast with
.B --multicast
omitted and providing the server IP explicitly via
.B --connect
on the client side.
.PP
The
.B --sdp
flag generates an SDP descriptor based on the configured audio settings.
The payload type is L16 (raw PCM) over RTP.
Most players including VLC, ffplay, and GStreamer support this format.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH LICENSING
.\"
.B wfas
itself is licensed under the European Union Public Licence (EUPL) version 1.2.
.PP
It bundles third-party open-source software. In particular it uses
.B FFmpeg
.RI ( https://ffmpeg.org )
for AAC/Opus audio encoding, distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public
Licence (LGPL) version 2.1 or later; some optional FFmpeg components may be
under the GPL. The FFmpeg native libraries are unmodified and are provided by
the JavaCPP Presets project
.RI ( https://github.com/bytedeco/javacpp-presets );
their source code is available at
.IR https://ffmpeg.org/download.html .
.PP
Other bundled components include JavaCV/JavaCPP, JetBrains Compose
Multiplatform, Kotlin and kotlinx.coroutines, Ktor, Bouncy Castle, dorkbox
SystemTray, JNA and SLF4J. Run
.B wfas --licenses
for the full attribution list, or see
.B THIRD_PARTY_LICENSES.md
in the project repository.
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH SEE ALSO
.\"
.BR vlc (1),
.BR ffplay (1),
.BR gst-launch-1.0 (1),
.BR aplay (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
.\"
.\" ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH AUTHOR
.\"
Marco Morosi.
Licensed under the European Union Public Licence (EUPL), version 1.2.
.br
.I https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/software/page/eupl
